Minimum Spanning Tree
---------------------

Given an undirected, connected graph, a spanning tree is some minimal
subset of the edges such that all the vertices are still connected. (Or
if a graph isn’t connected then each connected component has a spanning
tree, and together they form a spanning forest.)

How many edges will a spanning tree have?

If our graph is weighted, then each possible spanning tree has a total
weight. Minimizing that weight gives us a *minimum spanning tree* (MST).

How can we compute the MST of a weighted graph?

Two main algorithms:

  - Prim’s: The result will be a tree. Start by adding one vertex to the
    tree. (If the graph is connected, it doesn’t matter which vertex; if
    it is, we will find the MST for the component containing the chosen
    vertex.) Repeat until all (reachable) vertices are in the tree:
    Consider the edges incident on the tree, starting with the smallest.
    If it connects to another vertex already in the tree, discard it;
    otherwise add it to the tree, and then add the edges incident on the
    newly reached vertex into consideration.

  - Kruskal’s: The result will be a forest. Start with the discrete
    forest. Now consider all the graph’s edges in order by weight,
    smallest to largest. For each edge, if it would connect two
    previously disconnected trees, add it to the MSF; but if it would
    produce a cycle—a redundant connection—don’t add it.

What’s the time complexity of each of these algorithms?

It depends on how long the various operations take:

  - For Prim’s algorithm needs to maintain a set of edges ordered by
    weight, so it needs a priority queue. It will add and remove each
    edge once, so if each of those operations is O(log n) [as in what
    data structure?], then the algorithm takes O(E log E) [assuming the
    vertex set operations are contant time, which they should be].

  - For Kruskal’s algorithm, we need to consider the edges in order by
    weight, so we need to sort them O(E log E), and then we need to keep
    track of which vertices have been connected so far. How can we do
    that? I claim the most naive solution will be O(V) for each edge we
    consider, since that’s how long a DFS will take to discover if two
    nodes in the forest we are building are connected. (Why?) This
    yields a total time complexity of O(EV + E log E) = O(EV).

We can do better than O(EV) by maintaining an auxiliary data structure
to keep track of which vertices are in the same tree. Think of it as
having all the vertices in disjoint sets. We start with each in its own
set, and then we can union two sets to combine their elements into one.
There’s an ADT for this:

Union-Find ADT

interface UNION_FIND:
    # Returns the number of objects in the union-find. The objects
    # are the natural numbers 0, 1, ..., `self.len() - 1`.
    def len(self) -> nat?

    # Unions the set containing `a` with the set containing `b`.
    def union(self, a: nat?, b: nat?) -> VoidC

    # Returns whether `a` and `b` are in the same set?
    def same_set?(self, a: nat?, b: nat?) -> bool?

How might we implement this efficiently?
